Introduce the localization guide featuring the translation API (#6758)
ckeditor/ckeditor5: docs/framework/guides/deep-dive/localization.md

---
category: framework-deep-dive
---

# Localization

## Introduction

The CKEditor 5 ecosystem support message localization. It means that the UI of any feature can be translated for various languages and regions depending on the user's preferences. With the the recent release of the CKEditor 5 packages and CKEditor 5 dev tools we opened the translation system for 3rd-party plugins, provided a way for adding missing or fixing invalid translations to the editor and we introduced support for translating plural forms.

### Open API

> Until now the building process was creating short strings for *message IDs*. This behavior was confusing, it caused non-deterministic builds (as the ID was generated during the webpack compilation) and made adding translations to the build impossible as IDs have been changing with each new CKEditor 5 release and with each project rebuilding. So we decided to drop the *message ID* shortening feature, as the gain from lower bundle size was disproportionately lower than the loss from the mentioned issues. That means, that from now:

Reviewer: Here's something that I'd like to emphasize:

We write the docs for developers outside _CKEditor organization_, basically any developer out there willing to play with the editor.

This documentation should focus mostly on how to do stuff, maybe a little why some things are done the way they are but it should not explain how stuff was done in the past unless it's really necessary.

Here we don't really need to explain how things were handled in the past (especially that they were not available for anyone outside CKEditor organization).

Author: Good point :+1:

Author: I changed the whole chapter.

Before we start, let's explain the meaning of terms that are crucial for the translation process:

- *message* - a string or an object that should be translated, the string version works as a shortcut for the `{ id: message, string: message }` object form,
- *message ID* - a property used to distinguish messages, useful for short messages, where a collision can occur, like `%0 images`,
- *message string* - the default (English) form of the message, the default singular version when the message is supposed to support plural versions,
- *message plural* - an optional plural (English) version of the message, the presence of this property indicates that the message should support both, singular and plural forms,
- *PO file (.po)* - A file containing translations for the language in the [PO format](https://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/manual/html_node/PO-Files.html). All CKEditor 5 localizable packages contain such files in the `lang/translations/` directory.
- *POT file (.pot)* - A file containing source messages (English sentences) that will be translated,
- *translation asset* - a JS file or part of the file with generated translations for one language.

## Writing localizable UI

> All *messages* needing localization should be passed to the special CKEditor 5's `t()` function. This function can be retrieved from the editor's `locale` instance: `const { t } = editor.locale;` or from any view method `const t = this.t;` Note that this function should not be used as the `Locale` class method because during the translation process a static code analyzer catches *localizable messages* only from function forms.

Reviewer: > Note that this function should not be used as the \`Locale\` class method because during the translation process a static code analyzer catches _localizable messages_ only from function forms.

I think it would make sense to put this as a warning info box. Also you can push this information to the end of this block, after two code snippets showing `t()` usage.

> All *messages* needing localization should be passed to the special CKEditor 5's `t()` function. This function can be retrieved from the editor's `locale` instance: `const { t } = editor.locale;` or from any view method `const t = this.t;` Note that this function should not be used as the `Locale` class method because during the translation process a static code analyzer catches *localizable messages* only from function forms.

Reviewer: > Note that this function should not be used as the \`Locale\` class method because during the translation process a static code analyzer catches _localizable messages_ only from function forms.

I think it would make sense to put this as a warning info box. Also you can push this information to the end of this block, after two code snippets showing `t()` usage.

When using the `t()` function, you can create your own *localizable messages* or reuse *messages* created in CKEditor 5 packages your project depends on. In case of reusing *messages*, you won't have to worry about translating them as all work will be done by the CKEditor 5 team and Transifex translators anyway (but your help in translating still will be appreciated).

For simple *localizable messages* use the string form for simplicity:

```js
t( 'insert emoji' );
t( 'insert %0 emoji', emojiName );
t( 'insert %0 emoji', [ emojiName ] );
```

For more advanced scenarios use plain objects forms:

```js
t( { string: '%0 emoji', id: 'INSERT_EMOJI' }, 'insert' );
t( { string: '%0 emoji', plural: '%0 emojis', id: 'EMOJI' }, quantity );
t( { string: '%1 %0 emoji', plural: '%1 %0 emojis', id: 'INSERT_EMOJIS' }, [ quantity, 'Insert' ] );
```

### Examples

#### Localizing UI of plugins:

```js
// ...
editor.ui.componentFactory.add( 'smilingFaceEmoji', locale => {
	const command = editor.commands.get( 'insertSmilingFaceEmoji' );
	const buttonView = new ButtonView( locale );

	// The translation function.
	const { t } = editor.locale;

>   // The localized label.

Reviewer: Renders as uneven indentation:

![](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/5353898/81420334-2311c600-9150-11ea-8900-3b9af242a9a1.png)

	const label = t( 'insert smiling face emoji' );

	buttonView.set( {
		label,
		icon: emojiIcon,
		tooltip: true
	} );

	buttonView.on( 'execute', () => {
		editor.execute( 'insertSmilingFaceEmoji' );
		editor.editing.view.focus();
	} );
} );
// ...
```

> Note that this sample lacks a few parts. To check how to create a complete plugin, for example, check the {@link framework/guides/creating-simple-plugin Creating a simple plugin guide}.

Reviewer: Love this reference to "Creating a simple plugin" guide :heart:

![<3](https://media.giphy.com/media/fnvxr5iIIPCSeTS2Fz/giphy.gif)

Author: I just saw this strange wording :D I'll change it.

Author: Maybe: "Check \[how to create a complete CKEditor 5 plugin\](link)."?

#### Localizing aria attributes:

```js
editingView.change( writer => {
	const editingView = this._editingView;
	const t = this.t;

	editingView.change( writer => {
		const viewRoot = editingView.document.getRoot( this.name );

		writer.setAttribute( 'aria-label', t( 'Rich Text Editor, %0', [ this.name ] ), viewRoot );
	} );
} );
```

#### Localizing pending actions

Pending actions are used to inform the user that the action is in progress and we will lost data while exiting the editor - see {@link module:core/pendingactions~PendingActions the `PendingActions` class}

```js
_updatePendingAction() {
	// ...
	const pendingActions = this.editor.plugins.get( PendingActions );

	// ...
	const t = this.editor.t;

> 	const getMessage = value => `${ t( 'Upload in progress' ) } ${ parseInt( value ) }%.`;

Reviewer: Could it simply be something like `const getMessage = value => t( 'Upload in progress %0%', parseInt( value ) );`?

I assume the problem is `%0%`? If that's the case maybe we should use a different example or skip it all along, as it doesn't look nice.

	this._pendingAction = pendingActions.add( getMessage( this.uploadedPercent ) );
	this._pendingAction.bind( 'message' ).to( this, 'uploadedPercent', getMessage );
}
```

## Adding translations and localizing the editor UI

First of all, if you have found a missing or an incorrect translation in the CKEditor 5 translations, {@link framework/guides/contributing/contributing#translating check how you can contribute to the project}! Your help will be appreciated by others!

Adding translations to the editor can be done in three ways to satisfy various needs.

- by adding translations via {@link module:utils/translation-service.add the translation-service's `add()` function} - this function can be used at runtime before the editor starts

> - by extending the global `window.CKEDITOR_TRANSLATIONS` object - this object can be modified before and after the build step. CKEditor 5 translations assets operate on this object.

Reviewer: "this object can be modified before and after the build" - well this method can also be simply used at a runtime, isn't it? In exactly the same way as the first point (with the exception that the first needs an editor instance access.

If that's the case I think same wording should be used so keyword runtime should be used.

Author: Maybe `runtime` isn't the best wording here, but I improved the description.

```
# lang/translations/es.po

msgid ""
msgstr ""
"Language: es\n"
"Plural-Forms: nplurals=2; plural=(n != 1);\n"

msgid "Align left"
msgstr "Alinear a la izquierda"
```

<info-box>
	Note that the [CKEditorWebpackPlugin](https://github.com/ckeditor/ckeditor5-dev/tree/master/packages/ckeditor5-dev-webpack-plugin) is configured to parse by default only the CKEditor 5 source code when looking for *localizable messages* and generating *translation assets*. If you develop your own plugin outside of CKEditor 5 ecosystem and localize it via creating *PO files*, you should override both, the `sourceFilesPattern` and the `packageNamePattern` options to allow `CKEditorWebpackPlugin` analyzing the code and finding *messages* with corresponding translations. You should also mention these webpack plugin changes in your package README to make other users build the localized CKEditor 5 editor with your plugin correctly. This obstacle may be simplified in the future when the localization feature gets more popular.
</info-box>

To build the localized editor follow the steps from {@link features/ui-language building the editor using a specific language guide}.

## Known limitations

> - Currently it is impossible to change the chosen language at runtime without destroying the editor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Currently it is impossible to change the chosen editor's language at a runtime without destroying the editor.
```

---
category: framework-deep-dive
---

# Localization

## Introduction

All CKEditor 5 WYSIWYG editor features support message localization. It means that the user interface of any feature can be translated into various languages and regions depending on the user's preferences.

> Starting with the release of CKEditor 5 v19.0.0 as well as CKEditor 5 development tools we opened the translation system to third-party plugins. We also provided a way for adding missing or fixing invalid translations to the editor and introduced support for translating plural forms.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CKEditor 5 translation system is opened to third-party plugins. Any custom features that you might introduce can be localized. We also provided a way for adding missing or overwriting existing translations and we support translating plural forms.
```

- *A message string* &ndash; The default (English) form of the message.
	When the message is supposed to support plural versions, this is the default singular version.
- *A message plural* &ndash; An optional plural (English) version of the message.
	The presence of this property indicates that the message should support both singular and plural forms.
- *A PO file (`.po`)* &ndash; A file containing translations for the language in the [PO format](https://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/manual/html_node/PO-Files.html).
	All CKEditor 5 localizable packages contain such files in the `lang/translations/` directory.
- *A POT file (`.pot`)* &ndash; A file containing source messages (English sentences) that will be translated.
- *A translation asset* &ndash; A JavaScript file or part of the file with generated translations for one language.

## Writing a localizable UI

All *messages* that need localization should be passed to the special CKEditor 5's {@link module:utils/locale~Locale#t `t()` function}. This function can be retrieved from the editor's {@link module:utils/locale~Locale} instance: `const { t } = editor.locale;` or from any view method: `const t = this.t;`.

> 

Reviewer 2: A note here that you need to use specifically a function named t() because of static code checks? In an info box?

As the first argument, the `t()` function accepts either a string literal or an object literal containing the `id`, `string` and `plural` (optional) properties. The string literal will serve as both the *message ID* and the *message string*.

As the second argument, the translation function accepts a value or an array of values. These values will be used to fill the placeholders in more advanced translation scenarios. If the `plural` property is specified, the first value will be used as the quantity determining the plural form.

> When using the `t()` function, you can create your own *localizable messages* or reuse *messages* created in CKEditor 5 packages that your project depends on. In case of reusing *messages*, you will not need to worry about translating them as all work will be done by the CKEditor 5 team and [Transifex translators](https://www.transifex.com/ckeditor/ckeditor5/) anyway. Obviously, your help in translating will still be appreciated!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When using the `t()` function, you can create your own *localizable messages* or reuse *messages* created in CKEditor 5 packages that your project depends on. In case of reusing *messages*, you will not need to worry about translating them as all work will be done by the CKEditor 5 team and [Transifex translators](https://www.transifex.com/ckeditor/ckeditor5/). Obviously, your help in translating will still be appreciated!
```

For simple *localizable messages*, use the string form for simplicity:

```js
const emojiName = 'cat';

// Assuming that the English language was picked:
t( 'insert emoji' ); // "insert emoji"
t( 'insert %0 emoji', emojiName ); // "insert cat emoji"
t( 'insert %0 emoji', [ emojiName ] ); // "insert cat emoji"
```

For more advanced scenarios, use plain object forms:

```js
const quantity = 3;

// Assuming that the English language was picked:
t( { string: '%0 emoji', id: 'INSERT_EMOJI' }, 'insert' ); // "insert emoji"

> t( { string: '%0 emoji', plural: '%0 emojis', id: 'EMOJI' }, quantity ); // "3 emojis"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
t( { string: '%0 emoji', plural: '%0 emojis', id: 'INSERT_EMOJI' }, quantity ); // "3 emojis"
```

Author: These are actually three different examples. IDK if it makes sense to have the same ids here.

Reviewer 2: Hmm, I understand. But in this case, I'd propose other ids: EMOJI, N\_EMOJIS, ACTION\_N\_EMOJIS? How about that? :thinking:

> t( { string: '%1 %0 emoji', plural: '%1 %0 emojis', id: 'INSERT_EMOJIS' }, [ quantity, 'Insert' ] ); // "Insert 3 emojis"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
t( { string: '%1 %0 emoji', plural: '%1 %0 emojis', id: 'INSERT_EMOJI' }, [ quantity, 'Insert' ] ); // "Insert 3 emojis"
```

```

> <info-box warning>

Reviewer 2: IDK if it is better to put it here or earlier as I've commented. I think maybe earlier?

Author: > #### [**mlewand**](https://github.com/mlewand) [5 days ago](https://github.com/ckeditor/ckeditor5/pull/6758#discussion_r422201126)
> 
> Member

> Note that this function should not be used as the \`Locale\` class method because during the translation process a static code analyzer catches _localizable messages_ only from function forms.

> I think it would make sense to put this as a warning info box. Also you can push this information to the end of this block, after two code snippets showing `t()` usage.

Author: > #### [**mlewand**](https://github.com/mlewand) [5 days ago](https://github.com/ckeditor/ckeditor5/pull/6758#discussion_r422201126)
> 
> Member

> Note that this function should not be used as the \`Locale\` class method because during the translation process a static code analyzer catches _localizable messages_ only from function forms.

> I think it would make sense to put this as a warning info box. Also you can push this information to the end of this block, after two code snippets showing `t()` usage.

Author: But for me we can move it on the top as well.

Author: I moved it higher.

	Note that the `t()` function should not be used as a method of the `Locale` class because during the translation process a static code analyzer catches *localizable messages* only from function forms. For the same reason its first argument accepts only a string literal or an object literal. `Locale#t()` method calls and incompatible expressions passed to the `t()` calls will produce build-time warnings.
</info-box>

### Example: Localizing the plugin UI

> This example shows how to create a localizable user interface of a plugin.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This example shows how to create a localizable user interface of a plugin. Let's create a button that will insert smiling face emoji. The button will have a localizable tooltip.
```

```js
// ...
editor.ui.componentFactory.add( 'smilingFaceEmoji', locale => {

> 	const command = editor.commands.get( 'insertSmilingFaceEmoji' );

Reviewer 2: AFAICS this variable is not used anywhere in the code. You might have wanted to link it to the button state but this is not needed in this example, I think.

Author: You're right, I simplified the example and I forgot to remove it afterward.

	const buttonView = new ButtonView( locale );

	// The translation function.
	const { t } = editor.locale;

	// The localized label.

> 	const label = t( 'insert smiling face emoji' );

Reviewer 2: I think we use capital first letter in tooltips?

	buttonView.set( {
		label,
		icon: emojiIcon,
		tooltip: true
	} );

	buttonView.on( 'execute', () => {
		editor.execute( 'insertSmilingFaceEmoji' );
		editor.editing.view.focus();
	} );
} );
// ...
```

<info-box warning>

> 	Note that this code sample lacks a few parts. See {@link framework/guides/creating-simple-plugin how to create a complete plugin} to have a better understanding about creating CKEditor 5 plugins.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	See {@link framework/guides/creating-simple-plugin how to create a complete plugin} to have a better understanding about creating CKEditor 5 plugins.
```

</info-box>

### Example: Localizing `aria` attributes

For better accessibility support, do not forget about making `aria` attributes localizable:

```js
editingView.change( writer => {
	const editingView = this._editingView;

> 	const t = this.t;

Reviewer 2: What is `this` here?

In general, I don't understand this example, TBH. And there is a problem at the beginning (you have `editingView` in the first line and then you declare a const with that name).

I'd either make it example more elaborate or skip it altogether (it doesn't add much when it comes to translations system).

First of all, if you have found a missing or incorrect translation in any of CKEditor 5 features, {@link framework/guides/contributing/contributing#translating see how you can contribute to the project}! CKEditor 5 is an Open Source project used by people from all around the world, so your help will be appreciated by others.

Adding translations to the editor can be done in three ways to satisfy various needs.

- By [adding translations via the translation-service's `add()` function](#using-the-add-function).
	This can be done before initiating the CKEditor 5 editor instance but it requires importing the CKEditor 5 utility function.
- By [extending the global `window.CKEDITOR_TRANSLATIONS` object](#using-the-windowckeditor_translations-object).
	This can be done before initiating the CKEditor 5 editor instance.
- By [creating `.po` files with translations](#creating-po-files) in the `lang/translations/` directory of the published package like other CKEditor 5 packages do.
	This option will be useful for third-party plugin creators as it allows bundling translations only for needed languages during the webpack compilation.

### Using the `add()` function

> The first option for adding translations is via the {@link module:utils/translation-service.add the translation-service's `add()` helper}. This utility adds translations to the `window.CKEDITOR_TRANSLATIONS` object by extending it. Since it needs to be imported, it works only before building the editor.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first option for adding translations is via {@link module:utils/translation-service.add the translation-service's `add()` helper}. This utility adds translations to the `window.CKEDITOR_TRANSLATIONS` object by extending it. Since it needs to be imported, it works only before building the editor.
```

> Starting with the CKEditor 5 v19.0.0 release, it now accepts the `getPluralForm()` function as the third argument. It also accepts an array of translations for a *message* if the *message* should support singular and plural forms.

Reviewer 2: I am not sure if this information is needed.

In general, in the vast majority of cases, you will be adding translations to actually existing language, so the plural form will be taken from `.po` file. This means that you won't need to add it here, right?

I'd add this information here. People will either lose interest or will waste time looking how the `getPluralForm()` function should look like, while in reality, they will not need to pass it.

```js
add( 'pl', {
	'Add space': [ 'Dodaj spację', 'Dodaj %0 spacje', 'Dodaj %0 spacji' ]
} );

// Assuming that the Polish language was picked:
t( { string: 'Add space', plural: 'Add %0 spaces' }, 1 ) // "Dodaj spację"
t( { string: 'Add space', plural: 'Add %0 spaces' }, 2 ) // "Dodaj 2 spacje"
t( { string: 'Add space', plural: 'Add %0 spaces' }, 5 ) // "Dodaj 5 spacji"
```

### Using the `window.CKEDITOR_TRANSLATIONS` object

The second option is adding translations via the global `window.CKEDITOR_TRANSLATIONS` object.

For each language that should be supported, the `dictionary` property of this object should be extended and the `getPluralForm` function should be provided if missing.

> The `dictionary` property is a `message ID ⇒ translations` map, where the `translations` can be either one sentence (a string) or an array of translations with plural forms for the given language if the message should support plural forms as well.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `dictionary` property is a `message ID ⇒ translations` map, where the `translations` can be either a string or an array of translations with plural forms for the given language if the message should support plural forms as well.
```

The `getPluralForm` property should be a function that returns the plural form index for a given quantity. Note that when using CKEditor 5 translations, this property will be defined by *CKEditor 5 translation assets*.

Check an example below that demonstrates a part of the `window.CKEDITOR_TRANSLATIONS` object with Polish translations for the `Cancel` and `Add space` *message IDs*:

```js

> {

Reviewer 2: How about an example with `Object.assign()`? So people won't end up overwriting their translations.

Author: Done.

	// Each key should be a valid language code.
	pl: {
		// A map of translations for the 'pl' language.
		dictionary: {
			'Cancel': 'Anuluj',
			'Add space': [ 'Dodaj spację', 'Dodaj %0 spacje', 'Dodaj %0 spacji' ]
		},

		// A function that returns the plural form index for the given language.

> 		// getPluralForm: n => n == 1 ? 0 : n % 10 >= 2 && n % 10 <= 4 && ( n % 100 < 10 || n % 100 >= 20 ) ? 1 : 2

Reviewer 2: I'd uncomment this line, but I'd add another line of comment above reminding that you need to pass this function only if you are adding translations for a new language.

	}
	// Other languages...
}
```

> If you add a new language, remember to set the `getPluralForm` function which should return a number (or a Boolean for languages with simple plural rules like English) that indicates which form should be used for which value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you add a new language, remember to set the `getPluralForm` function which should return a number that indicates which form should be used for a given value.
```

Reviewer 2: Also, this paragraph is partially something that I mentioned earlier. It should be moved up.

Author: We have later an example showing the Boolean usage as well.

Author: That's also an "official standard" to pass boolean values here.

Reviewer 2: Okay. I've changed the suggestion.

Author: https://docs.transifex.com/formats/gettext

Author: https://docs.transifex.com/formats/gettext

All CKEditor 5 WYSIWYG editor features support message localization. It means that the user interface of any feature can be translated into various languages and regions depending on the user's preferences.

> CKEditor 5 translation system is opened to third-party plugins. Any custom features that you might introduce can be localized. We also provided a way for adding missing or overwriting existing translations and we support translating plural forms.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
CKEditor 5 translation system is open to third-party plugins. Any custom features that you introduce can be localized. The system also provides a way to add missing or overwrite existing translations and supports translating plural forms.
```

> CKEditor 5 translation system is opened to third-party plugins. Any custom features that you might introduce can be localized. We also provided a way for adding missing or overwriting existing translations and we support translating plural forms.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
CKEditor 5 translation system is open to third-party plugins. Any custom features that you introduce can be localized. The system also provides a way to add missing or overwrite existing translations and supports translating plural forms.
```

<info-box warning>

> 	Make sure to use up-to-date CKEditor 5 development tool packages. Older versions of the tools do not provide support for features described in this guide.

Reviewer 3: We removed the version reference from the sentence above, so maybe it makes sense to mention it now.

```suggestion
	Make sure to use up-to-date CKEditor 5 development tool packages. Versions of the tools older than v19.0.1 do not provide support for features described in this guide.
```

> 	Make sure to use up-to-date CKEditor 5 development tool packages. Older versions of the tools do not provide support for features described in this guide.

Reviewer 3: We removed the version reference from the sentence above, so maybe it makes sense to mention it now.

```suggestion
	Make sure to use up-to-date CKEditor 5 development tool packages. Versions of the tools older than v19.0.1 do not provide support for features described in this guide.
```

As the second argument, the translation function accepts a value or an array of values. These values will be used to fill the placeholders in more advanced translation scenarios. If the `plural` property is specified, the first value will be used as the quantity determining the plural form.

<info-box warning>

> 	Note that the `t()` function should not be used as a method of the `Locale` class because during the translation process a static code analyzer catches *localizable messages* only from function forms. For the same reason its first argument accepts only a string literal or an object literal. `Locale#t()` method calls and incompatible expressions passed to the `t()` calls will produce build-time warnings.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	Due to static code analyzer used in translation process it is required that you use a function named `t()`. It shouldn't be called on `Locale` instance and it shouldn't have a different name. The code analyzer looks for *localizable messages* only in `t()` function calls.
	
	For the same reason, the first argument can only be a string literal or an object literal. Variables cannot be passed.
```

### Example: Localizing the plugin UI

> This example shows how to create a localizable user interface of a plugin. Let's create a button that will insert smiling face emoji. The button will have a localizable tooltip.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This example shows how to create a localizable user interface of a plugin. Let's create a button that will insert a smiling face emoji. The button will have a localizable tooltip.
```
